NAMI

SENSORS AND AUTOMATION
(SUBMISSION)

~ JAYESH NAGORAO AWACHAR

BRANCH:- METALLURGY
MIS:- 612211010

Sensors Modelling and Simulation

PRACTICAL NO.1. Characterize che temperature sensor (RTD)

Experiment 1: - static characteristics of RTD.

°
°

‘Aim: ~To understand the working principle of RTD.
Objectives: -

1 Study static and dynamic characteristics of RTD

2. Study effect of various parameters on RTD performance

Procedure: - Step by step description,

Select the material of RTD you want to use, Temperature coefficient (a) for the same will be
displayed on the screen. Note this value. Click on ' RO! to get the value of RO for selected RTD.
Note the same, Click on ‘Get Temp’. The temperature for which Rt is to be found will be
displayed.

Using formula calculate the value of Rt and enter the answer in the box provided (upto 2
decimals with rounding off). Submit the answer using submit button. If your calculation is
correct, go to step 3. Repeat the procedure min 3 times. If your calculation is wrong, you will
be asked to repeat the same, Please refer to GET FORMULA tab and verify your calculations.
After finishing minimum 3 set of correct readings, you can see the graph by clicking on 'Plot'.
‘When the graph is displayed click Next tab to repeat the procedure with different reference
resistance(RO) value and with different materials.

Minimum 3 calculations are necessary to plot the graph.

Study the graphs for RTD performance with different reference resistance values and
different materials

Experiment 2: - pynamic characteristics.

°

‘Aim: -To study the dynamic response of RTD probe
In this experiment, Platinum RTD is used for calculating the time constant values. The
response of RTD for a step change in the input is plotted. The maximum temperature the
RTD attains, is same as the temperature displayed by ‘GET Temp’ tab.

‘Procedure: -Step by step description

1

Simulation: -

Select the RTD as bare element (make it on). With the standard dimensions considered for
bare element, the time constant value will get displayed in the output box. Verify this by
using equation given under Get formula tab.

Now select the RTD dynamic performance with sheath. Select appropriate material and
thickness value. The time constant value will get displayed in the output box. Verify this by
Using equation given under formula tab.

Observe the change in the time constant values with different materials with different
thickness.

Now select the RTD dynamic performance with thermowell. Select appropriate material,
thickness and filling material. The time constant value will get displayed in the output box
when thermowell material, thickness and filling material is selected. Verify this by using
equation given under formula tab.

Observe the change in the time constant values with different materials with different
thickness. Also see the effect of change in filing material

Click on plot button to observe the dynamic response (Time Vs Temperature).

Observe and verify response time of RTD which is generally 5 times the time constant value.
‘After completion of both the parts, you can proceed to Post Test to find out if you have
understood all aspects of the experiment.

1135 3B O)

> LEVEL 2: -DYNAMIC CHARACTERSTICS
% CALCULATIONS: -
PRACTICAL NO.2. Characterize the LYDT

“Aim: -To understand working principle of LOT

Objectives: -
Study the relation between core displacement and output of LVDT.

Understand the effect of change in supply frequency on LVDT performance.
Understand the effect of change in excitation (supply) voltage on LVDT performance.

pees

+ Procedure: - Step by step description.

1. First you need to configure the LVDT. Click on ' Show panel tab at the right bottom for
making the circuit, drag and drop the primary coil, Armature and secondary coils at the
locations shown on left hand side.

2. Now select No of Turns, peak to peak supply voltage and frequency from the drag and drop
menu, available below LVDT diagram. Click on configure block to configure LVDT.

3. Now click on the black rectangular core placed between primary and secondary winding
Drag the core to left hand side and observe the effect on the output magnitude. This can be
observed on the time vs output voltage waveform and on the Distance vs output voltage
graph. The core displacement is indicated in the square box below the diagram.

4, Drag the core to right hand side and observe the effect on the output magnitude. Also
observe the change in the phase.

5. Repeat steps 2 to 4 by changing supply voltage keeping frequency and no of turns constant.
Study the effect on the output voltage. For this click on blue colour ‘Configure’ tab in the
right-side panel. You need to select required parameter value from drop down menu. After
selecting the values click on green ' Configure' tab to set the parameter values.

6. Repeat steps 2 to 4 by changing supply frequency keeping and no of turns constant. Study
the effect on the output voltage.

7. Now keep supply voltage and frequency constant. Change the no of turns and observe the
effect on the output voltage by repeating steps 2 to 4.

+ Simulation Grap|

{A AEA
| =

=) issue =~

+ CALCULATIONS: -

END OF EXPERIMENT 2
PUNE aw

Level

10.

PRACTICAL NO.3. Simulate the performance of a chemical sensor.

‘Aim: -To understand the working principle of chemical sensors
Objectives: -

Study the working principle of pH and conductive.

Calibrate the pH sensor.

Study the effect of temperature on pH measurement.

Study effect of temperature and effect of contamination on conductivity measurement.

1: Conductivity Measurement

‘Aim: -To study the measurement of the conductivity of the sample.
Procedure: - Step by step description.

Study the schematic diagram.
Select the sample from drop down menu.

Select the concentration of the sample.

Cell constant will be fixed which is displayed as 1 on screen.

‘After entering data the PPM Concentration, Equivalent weight and Density at 25°C is
displayed in the right-side panel.

Enter the calculated specific conductance. For calculations of specific conductance click on
Formula tab.

Using the formula, calculate the value of the conductivity for the selected sample and enter
the answer in the box provided (up to 2 decimals with rounding off). Submit the answer
using submit button.

If your calculation is correct, it will be displayed on the screen. Otherwise, you need to
recalculate,

Repeat the procedure for different concentrations of a same sample.

Minimum three calculations are necessary to plot the graph and after three calculations the
plot tab will be activated.

2: Effect of Temperature.

‘Aim: Study the effect of temperature change on the measurement of conductivity.
In this experiment, by using the formula one can change the value of the temperature and
calculate the conductivity.
10.

Procedure: -Step by step description.

Study the schematic diagram.
The sample selected is by default the user has selected for level 1.

Select the concentration of the substance. Selected concentration will be displayed on the
screen,

Click on Get Temp. The temperature value and its temperature coefficient will be displayed
on the right-hand side on the screen.

Enter the calculated conductivity at a temperature of interest. For calculations of
conductivity click on FORMULA tab.

Using formula, calculate the value of the conductivity for the selected sample and enter the
answer in the box provided (up to 2 decimals with rounding off). Submit the answer using
submit button.

If your calculation is correct, the output conductivity at the selected temperature will be
displayed on the screen.

Repeat the procedure for different temperatures of the same substance and concentration.
Minimum three calculations are necessary to plot the graph and after three calculations the
plot tab will be activated.

After study hide the graph and repeat the experiment with varying substance and
concentration.

Level 3: Effect of Contamination

°

eres

‘Aim: Study the effect of contamination on measurement of ph.
In this experiment, one can change the value of the contamination and observe its effect on
the conductivity of the substance.

Procedure: -Step by step description.
Study the diagram completely.

Select the substance. Selected substance will be displayed on the screen.

Select the concentration of the substance. Selected concentration will be displayed on the
screen.

Cell constant will be fixed which is displayed as 1 on screen.

Select the contamination in mm.

After selecting the contamination, the Specific conductance, Modified Cell Constant,
modified specific conductance value is displayed on the screen.

By comparing the Specific conductance, modified specific conductance one can see the
effect of contamination on substance conductivity.

Change the substance, concentration and observe the result.
* SIMULATION: PH SIMULATOR

+ LEVEL 2 SIMULATION

> LEVEL 3: EFFECT OF TEMPRETURE
END OF EXPERIMENT 3

PRACTICAL NO.4. Measurement of level in tank using capacitive type level probe

+ Aim: -To measure tank level using capacitance level probe.
Objectives: -

1. Review various methods of level measurement.

2. Understand working of capacitance level transmitter.

+» PROCEDURE

Study the given diagram completely.
2.Select the height of the tank in centimetres.

3.The value of radius of outer cylinder/pipe for pipe in pipe type probe r2 is fixed 2.5m.

4 Select the value of radius of inner cylinder/pipe for pipe in pipe type probe ri in centimetres.
5.Span value will get displayed. Span is 90% of the height of the tank.

6.Select the service for which capacitance probe is to be used.

7.Click on ‘Configure System’. It will ask for confirmation.

8.After confirming, select the fluid level from drop down menu for selected service.

9.£nter the calculated user output capacitance in uF. For calculations of output capacitance click
on GET FORMULA tab. Using formula calculate the value of the output capacitance for the
corresponding level and enter the answer in the box provided (up to 2 decimals with rounding
off). Submit the answer using submit button.

10.1f your calculation is correct, it will be displayed on the screen. Minimum three calculations
are necessary to plot the graph. Click on level vs. capacitance graph and level vs. current graph
and study them.

1L.Click on next set of values. Change the value of rland repeat steps 7 to 10 Click on graphs and
study them.

+ SIMULATION:

Level vs Current Graph

Level Vs Current =
ws
os
i
.
a EF Ey a
Level (em)
© Currant Graph 1
[om a
Level vs Capacitance Graph
Level vs Capacitance =
or
ns & Eb &
Lvl fem)
> Copectance Graph |

[oa

END OF EXPERIMENT 4
PNB ee

% SIMULATION:

Programmable Logic Controller

PRACTICAL NO.S. Study hardware and software wsed tn PLC.

‘Aim: -To study hardware and software associated with PLC
Objectives: -

Learn the basics and hardware components of PLC.
Understand configuration of PLC system.

Study various building blocks of PLC.

Procedure: - Hardware and Software Study Procedure (short version) step by step
description.

Hardware: - Gather Resources: Obtain a PLC system or simulator and access relevant
documentation.

Identify Components: Learn about key hardware components, including the CPU,
input/output modules, power supply, and communication interfaces.

Wiring and Connections: Understand how to wire input/output devices and connect Install
the PLC to power.

Software: -

Select Language: Choose a programming language (e.g., ladder logic) for the PLC.

Software: Install and configure PLC programming software on your computer.

Create Program: Develop a simple control program, download it to the PLC, and run it.
2.Monitor and Debug: Use the software's monitoring and debugging tools to test and
troubleshoot the program.

Explore Advanced Features: Learn about data logging, HMI integration, and security settings.
3.Documentation and Practice: Consult Manuals: Refer to PLC hardware and software
manuals for specific details. Use Online Resources: Access online tutorials and seek guidance
from experienced professionals. Practice: Apply your knowledge through projects and
simulations. Following this procedure will help you gain a solid understanding of PLC
hardware and software.

Programmable Logic Controller

END OF EXPERIMENT 5.

20H 2

*

Nee

Ai

PRACTICAL NO.S, IMPLEMENTATION OF LOGIC GATES

To understand Simple Ladder program.

Objectives: -
Develop a ladder using standard procedure.
Solve the problem using ladder programming,

Procedure for Creating and Testing Ladder Logic Diagrams: -
Preparatory Steps:

a

b.
c
a.

Understand the problem statement, e.g,, testing logic for OR gates, AND gates, etc.
Develop and validate the logic on paper by considering various cases.

Prepare a truth table and test the logic with all valid cases.

Open the PLC simulator by clicking the "Simulator" button,

Creating the Ladder Diagram:

a
b.
c

In the simulator workspace, you'll see the first window.
Place contacts and coils as needed by selecting them from the left panel.
Double-click on contacts and coils to assign tag names like "start," "stop,
"lamp," etc. Ensure that tag names match process connections.

Note that tag names are case-sensitive, so use the correct case for bi-level usage.
Click the "Run" button on the left side to enter the run mode. Both sides of the rung
will turn green, indicating it's ready for testing. In run mode, you can't make changes;
switch to design/program mode for modifications.

Double-click on contacts to toggle their state. This will change the output contact's
status.

Keep in mind that ladder contacts are initially in a de-energized state, meaning they
are not active.

‘motor,"

Simulation: -

Tete!

im - @ - _ _ -
7 2.
go

END OF EXPERIMENT 6

PRACTICAL NO.7. Develop an application using On-Delay tmer

+ Aim: - To develop an application using On-Delay timer.

Objectives: -
1. Study the timing diagram of On Delay Timer.
2. Solve the assignment of Ton timer.

+ Procedure: - In this experiment, an on-delay timer is being tested using a simulator. The
following timer bits are observed:

1."q" bit: The initializing bit
2."EN" bit: The enable bit.
3."DN" bit: The done bit.
4.°TT" bit: The timer timing bit.

A. The user needs to enter a preset value for the timer. To reset the timer counter, a "Reset"
command is used with a tag, which should match the counters tag, like "CU1.”

B. The timer can be configured with a time base of either 1 millisecond (1 mS) or 10
milliseconds (10 mS) based on the application's needs.

C. To test the "EN," "DN,” and "TT" bits, you can double-click on them and assign a tag
name. The same tag name is used in a new rung to check the status or activate the
timer’s output. These bits can also be used for cascading timers.

D. Inrun mode, you can observe the bit status when input "a" is toggled. When the delay is
over, you can check the output bit status.

E. To reset the "DN" counter, you use the "Reset" command with a tag matching the
counter’s tag, like "CD1." This allows the counter to be configured for new counts without
reloading the page.

* Simulation: -

“ Conclusion: - An On-Delay timer application offers precise control over the timing of
actions, enhancing efficiency and safety in various domains, including manufacturing,
automation, and energy management. It provides a valuable tool for automating
processes and tasks, ultimately improving productivity and resource management.

END OF EXPERIMENT 7
PRACTICAL NO.8. Develop on application using Off-Delay timer.

“Aim: -To Develop an application using OFF Delay Timer.

2. Solve the assignment of Toff timer.

‘+ PROCEDURE: -

1. Implement the operation using Simulator

The configuration of off delay timer is same as ‘on delay timer’.

A typical difference can be observed in the operation (in Run mode) .

When the q bit is energised the output DN bit goes high. The timer starts only after
toggling the initialisation bit again.

sep

© th (© 50168272.695080/ ab smsatow/PI_UAB.NEW/SARP On, OF. Deay, Timer pea ry

PLC Lab

To test the EN, DN, and TT bits; double click on the bit and give tag name to the bit. The same
tag name is to be used in the new rung to test the status or to energies the output. You can also
test the cascading of the timer using these bits.

Simulation: -
a a
a
a) 8
2

END OF EXPERIMENT 8

PRACTICAL NO.9. Davelop an application using up/down counter,

“Aim: -To Develop an application using UP/DOWN counter
Objectives: -

1. Study Counter timing diagram.

Develop an application specific ladder program using counters.
Procedure: -

toe pe

implement the counter using Simulator.

2. The counter counts the pulses received at input. The pulses can be given by toggling the
input bit "q" in this case. The counter will keep on counting tll it reaches the preset value
set by the user. Once the accumulator is equal to preset the DN bit will be energised.
After this instant if next pulse is detected, the accumulator will increment without
changing the status of DN bit.

3. To reset the counter use "Reset" command so that the counter can be configured for new
counts without reloading the page. Please note the tag of the reset bit must be the tag of
counter e.g.,"CU1". The screen shot will appear as shown below.

{© [0 5016222368 0m av/imltow FC LAB NEWD6A09 Up-Oown, Coun 25
Puc Lab
— a
|
=e) ne

4. Incase of down counter the entire procedure will remain same. Only the number of
counts are to be entered in the accumulator tab. The preset value is zero. When the input
contact closes, the accumulator will go on decrementing, will reach to zero 0’ value and
the status of done bit will change.

5. To reset the DN counter use "Reset” command so that the counter can be configured for
new counts without reloading the page. Please note the tag of the reset bit must be the
tag of counter e.g. "CD1".

Simulation: -
Bil

END OF EXPERIMENT 9

THANK YOU
