SENSORS AND AUTOMATION LAB

Name: SHUBHAM P DENGANE
Class: SY METALLURGY
Batch: A

MIS No.: 612211022

Sensors Modelling and Simulation

1. Characterize the temperature sensor (RTD)

2. Characterize the LVDT

3. Simulate the performance of a chemical sensor

4, Measurement of level in tank using capacitive type level probe

Programmable Logic Controller

1. Study hardware and software used in PLC

2. Implementation of Logic gates

3. Develop an application using On-Delay timer
4, Develop an application using Off-Delay timer

5. Develop an application using up/down counter
Experiment 1: Characterize the Temperature Sensor (RTD)
Aim: To understand the working principle of RTD
Objectives:

1. Study static and dynamic characteristics of RTD
2. Study effect of various parameters on RTD performance

Procedure:

Part 1: Static characteristics

1. Select the material of RTD you want to use. Temperature
coefficient (a) for the same will be displayed on the screen. Note
this value.

2. Click on ' RO' to get the value of RO for selected RTD. Note the
same.

3. Click on 'Get Temp’. The temperature for which Rt is to be found
will be displayed.

4, Using formula calculate the value of Rt and enter the answer in
the box provided (up to 2 decimals with rounding off). Submit
the answer using submit button.

5. If your calculation is correct, go to step 3. Repeat the procedure
min 3 times.

6. If your calculation is wrong, you will be asked to repeat the same.
Please refer to GET FORMULA tab and verify your calculations.

7. After finishing minimum 3 set of correct readings, you can see
the graph by clicking on ‘Plot’.

8. When the graph is displayed click Next tab to repeat the
procedure with different reference resistance(RO) value and
with different materials.

9. Minimum 3 calculations are necessary to plot the graph.

10. Study the graphs for RTD performance with different
reference resistance values and different materials
Part 2: Dynamic Characteristics:

1.

Select the RTD as bare element (make it on). With the standard
dimensions considered for bare element, the time constant value
will get displayed in the output box. Verify this by using equation
given under Get formula tab.

. Now select the RTD dynamic performance with sheath. Select

appropriate material and thickness value. The time constant
value will get displayed in the output box. Verify this by using
equation given under formula tab.

. Observe the change in the time constant values with different

materials with different thickness.

. Now select the RTD dynamic performance with thermowell.

Select appropriate material, thickness and filling material. The
time constant value will get displayed in the output box when

thermowell material, thickness and filling material is selected.
Verify this by using equation given under formula tab.

. Observe the change in the time constant values with different

materials with different thickness. Also see the effect of change
in filling material.

. Click on plot button to observe the dynamic response (Time Vs

Temperature).

. Observe and verify response time of RTD which is generally 5

times the time constant value.
Observation:

Temperature vs Resistance
250.

2s

3

Resistance (ohm)

150:

125.

a Fy re) we 52) Es)

‘Temperature (°C)

(- graph 1

Temperature Vs Time
800
600
ge
‘@ 400
3
&
8 200
€
5
&
o
9200°5 io 20 30 zn 30
Time (sec)
[© Bare + Withsheath-# Thermowell = Step-Input

Temp. coefficient | Ro Temperature (°C) Rt
0.00385 100 75 128.875
0.00385 100 63 124.255
0.00385 100 345 232.825
Result:

Calculations:

eeGiapbie G0 ~¢ ) i
Ry = lon ( 1+ 0-003Rsx4s)
2e. 845 A,

0
z
9
Q
g

Conclusion:

1. Resistance of RTD probe depends on the temperature and
material as different materials have different values of
temperature coefficients.

2. The value of time constant increases when RTD is placed inside a
sheath and it increases further when placed inside a thermowell.
Experiment 2: Characterize the LVDT

Aim: To understand working principle of LVDT

Objectives:

1.
2.

Study relation between core displacement and output of LVDT.
Understand the effect of change in supply performance on LVDT
performance.

. Understand the effect of change in excitation (supply) voltage on

LVDT performance.

Procedure:

1.

First you need to configure the LVDT. Click on ' Show panel' tab
at the right bottom. For making the circuit, drag and drop the
primary coil, Armature and secondary coils at the locations
shown on left hand side.

. Now select No of Turns, peak to peak supply voltage and

frequency from the drag and drop menu, available below LVDT
diagram. Click on configure block to configure LVDT.

. Now click on the black rectangular core placed between primary

and secondary windings.

. Drag the core to left hand side and observe the effect on the

output magnitude. This can be observed on the time vs output

voltage waveform and on the Distance vs output voltage graph.
The core displacement is indicated in the square box below the
diagram

. Drag the core to right hand side and observe the effect on the

output magnitude. Also observe the change in the phase.

. Repeat steps 2 to 4 by changing supply voltage keeping

frequency and no of turns constant. Study the effect on the
output voltage. For this click on blue colour ‘Configure’ tab in the
right-side panel. You need to select required parameter value
from drop down menu. After selecting the values click on green‘
Configure’ tab to set the parameter values.

. Repeat steps 2 to 4 by changing supply frequency keeping and no
of turns constant. Study the effect on the output voltage.

. Now keep supply voltage and frequency constant. Change the no.
of turns and observe the effect on the output voltage by
repeating steps 2 to 4.

Conclusion:

Waveforms change as we change the number of turns, supply voltage
and supply frequency.

Experiment 3: Simulate the performance of a chemical sensor
Aim: To understand the working principles of a chemical sensor.
Objectives:

1. Study the working principle of pH and conductivity sensors.

2. Calibrate the pH sensor.

3. Study the effect of temperature on pH measurement.

4. Study the effect of temperature and contamination on
conductivity measurement.

Procedure:

Level 1: pH probe calibration

Aim: Study calibration of a pH probe.
Step by step Procedure:

1. When the simulator window opens, initial pH value is displayed
in the control panel on the screen. Select the pH value for which
the probe is to be calibrated.

2. After entering pH value, the pH verses output mV values are
displayed.

3. Click on 'Plot'. The graph of pH verses millivolt will be displayed.

4, After getting the graph, hide the graph and switch on to the next
experimenti.e. Level 2

Level 2: Measurement of pH
Aim: Study of Measurement of pH.

In this experiment, by using the formula one can calculate the pH and
understand the pH measurement system.

Step by step Procedure:

1. Study the measurement diagram completely.
2. Select the sample. After selecting the sample, pH value will be
displayed on the screen.

3. Enter the calculated millivolt value. For calculations of millivolt
click on FORMULA tab.

4, Using the formula, calculate the value of the millivolt output for
the sample. In the formula, value of pHc is the pH value deviated
from 7. Subtract the value of pH from 7 and enter the answer in
the box provided (upto 2 decimals with rounding off). Submit
the answer using submit button.

5. If your calculation is correct, the output millivolt value will be
displayed on the screen.

6. Repeat the procedure if necessary for different samples.

Level 3: Effect of Temperature
Aim: Study the effect of temperature change on measurement of pH.

In this experiment, by using the formula one can calculate the pH and
understand the pH measurement system.

Step by step Procedure:

1. In this level the sample is the same as selected in level 2. This is
default selection. The pH of the sample is displayed in the control
panel.

2. Click on Get Temperature. The temperature of sample and the
output milli volt will be displayed on the screen now. Compare
this value with the previous level output value. The reference
temperature considered for the previous levels is 25°C.

3. Click on Plot Click on Plot tab to plot the graph.

4. You can verify the answer by putting the values in a formula.
Only value of the temperature (in Kelvin) will change.
Result:

400:

200:

‘output (mv)

PH Vs Output(mv)

200
400
so es ry ty To 12 1a
pH
(4 Graph 1
PH Vs Output(mv)
500
250

‘Output(mv
°

-250:

500

zs 5 75
pH

(© Graph 1- Graph 2)

Concentration vs Conductivity

‘Agianonpues

F

Ts

%
Concentration in Percentage

% 5

75

-t Measurement Graph|t

‘Temperature vs Conductivity

&

=

“Temperature in Degree Celsiue

Ey

%

8

suowars ut AARanpues

(-# Temperature Graph t )

Level-3 Contamination

Level
Control Panel:
Sample: inet

| Concentration: 20° ag
oS celleonstant: [1°

contamination2™—" —_~]

Console window:

Assumption: Half of this value is deposited on each <0

Assumpt Modified Cell Constant : P.

Default values for L, A and B:

Totem ,Ac10cm., BeO-tem, specific Conductance

selected Contamination is 04 wasie: [22__[siemens
Modified specific [282 (siemens)

conductance value:

Calculations:

8
:
oe
ie}
ie}
g

,| C= $0000 x}.023 = 1.403,

| 1000 x 36.46
“| SC = 1.403 x426 x_(1- 0. 370-403 +0.3841-403) = 0.65
ia i 1000
wilL€ = 100000 i Ga geaerea e
- 1000 x 36.46
SC = 2.874 x426x (1-0.372.874 +0.38x2.874) = 1.79

1000

_30r| C= 300000 x 1.149 = 9.454

1000 x 36.46

[sc = 9-454 x 426 x (1-0.370945¢ + 0.38x 9.454) = 13.9]

= ae 1000

Conclusion:

1. pH value changes as temperature is varied.

2. Specific conductance increases as concentration is increased.
3. Temperature also has and effect on specific conductance.

4. Specific conductance decreases with increasing amount of
contamination.
Experiment 4: Measurement of level in tank using capacitive type
level probe.

Aim: To measure tank level using capacitive probes.

Objectives:

1. Review various methods of level measurement.
2. Understand working of capacitance level transmitter.

Procedure:

1. Study the given diagram completely.

2. Select the height of the tank in centimetres.

3. The value of radius of outer cylinder/pipe for pipe in pipe type
probe 12 is fixed 2.5cm.

4. Select the value of radius of inner cylinder/pipe for pipe in pipe
type probe r1 in centimetres.

5. Span value will get displayed. Span is 90% of the height of the
tank.

6. Select the service for which capacitance probe is to be used.

. Click on ‘Configure System’. It will ask for confirmation.
8. After confirming, select the fluid level from drop down menu for

selected service.

Enter the calculated user output capacitance in wf. For calculations of

output capacitance click on GET FORMULA tab. Using formula

calculate the value of the output capacitance for the corresponding

level and enter the answer in the box provided (up to 2 decimals with

rounding off). Submit the answer using submit button.

N
Observation:

Level vs Capacitance =
con

oon

$

q

% oo
008 SS
cone
oor % ® % & o 7 To cs 7

Level (em)

Level Vs Current

Current (om)

u @ 7 ry o 0 To rc}
Level (em)

-@ Current Graph 1+ Current Graph 2 |

Height of Tank: 500 cm
Outer radius(r2): 2.5cm
Span Value: 445
Service: Coffee Beans

r1 hi h2 Cc

0.1 400 45 0.0081
0.1 355 90 0.0085
0.1 310 135 0.0089
0.3 400 45 0.0012
0.3 355 90 0.0013
0.3 310 135 0.00134

Calculations:
2M1E. (400 + 15x45) =
aac
“40| C= 27. (355 +15%90) =
An Foy
2ME. (310 + 1.5x135)
| an (25/0)

0.0084 pF

0.008) pF

0.0085 pe

Ay = 0.3

45.| c= 21€, (40041.5x45) =

0.0012 pF

An (2-8/0. 3)

qo| c = 2me (35541-5090) =

O-001myr

tn (2-5/o.3)

135| C = 27€. (31041.5%195) = :

0.00134 pF

dn (2:5/0.3)

Conclusion:

The Level vs Capacitance graph changes as we vary the inner radius,
but no change is observed in the Level vs Current graph.
Experiment 5: Study Hardware and Software used in PLC

Aim: To study hardware and software associated with PLC

Objectives:

1. Learn the basics and hardware components of PLC
2. Understand configuration of PLC system
3. Study various building blocks of PLC

Experiment 6: Implementation of Logic gates

Aim: To understand Simple Ladder program

Objectives:

1. Develop a ladder using standard procedure.
2. Solve the problem using ladder programming.

Procedure:

1. Prior to starting of the development of ladder diagram following
steps needs to be understood:
a. Understand the problem statement like test the logic for
OR gate, AND Gate etc.
b. Develop the logic on paper and validate the logic by
considering various cases
c. Prepare the truth table and test the logic using all valid
cases
d. Go to simulator icon and click on the "Simulator" button
e. The PLC simulator will be opened in new window
2. The procedure for writing the ladder diagram in the work space
is as follows
a. The screen shot for the first window will appear like this.
Glidk thie icon to add rew rung

‘These instructions are availatletar devel oping ladder
and these are available in program made only,

Leino nec ST png TEIN: is
FA Osaze, " —

The active rung will be indicated by blue line on the left
side of the rung.

b. Place the contacts as per the requirement by clicking the
appropriate contact shown in the left pan of the window. In
the example demonstrated below one normally contact and
one coil is placed as shown the figure.
c. Double Click on the contact or coil and you can give tag
name like "start", "stop" etc. Please ensure that the tag
numbers are true replica of process connections. Similarly
give tag name to coil like "motor", "Lamp" etc. The final

ladder will look like this.

[[Bivicansin noone renonnan tiopea a IRC NS

© % © MO s9161z73.693060 sar umuaror/PCIAB NEW/TIMGL OL

d. Please note that the tag names are case sensitive and if you
are using them in circuit as bit make sure that the correct
tag name appears.

e. Click the Run button available at the left side of the window
so the ladder will be ready for running and you can test
your logic. Both sides of the rung will become green and
this is the indication of run mode. Please not that in run
mode the contact is not available so if you want to make
changes you will have to go in design/program mode.

. Double click on the contact and the window for toggling
the contact will appear. As you press toggle the state of
contact will change. Hence the output contact status will

change.
(Li eieeesi ot TX inet pe] INC nen 2 sey
© ff Osorsszz3e on

7 :

ii

if you place the cursor on the contact the status
will be shown (In this case start has 1 state means
the contact is energised)

g. Please remember the ladder contacts or the state of the
inputs and outputs are always in de-energised state. The
de-energised is that state wherein the contacts are in non-
active state.

h. You can once again toggle the contact and the output state
will change. To add any contact, you will have to go in
programme mode. Click on the rung and add contacts.
i. To delete any contact or output click on the contact green
line below the contact will appear press "delete" the
contact will be deleted.

j. To reload the ladder, right click the mouse "Reload "button

will appear and after pressing the button the page will be

ready for new ladder development.

You can add seven elements in series and 5 elements in

parallel.

|. To add element in parallel click on the contact where you
wish to add parallel branch. Select the branch and drag it to
location where you wish to terminate the branch. The

screen will appear as shown below.

m. Repeat the procedure and check the correctness of the
logic.

n. Similarly, you can check the logic for OR, NOR, and NAND
gates. Validate the truth tables and confirm the results.
Observation:

AND gate

5

o

o

Experiment 7: Develop an application using On-Delay timer

Aim: To develop an application using On-Delay timer.

Objectives:

1. Study the timing diagram of On Delay Timer
2. Solve the assignment of Ton timer

Procedure:

In this experiment the on-delay timer will be tested for its
functionalities using Simulator. Following bits of the timer are to be
observed.

« Initialising bit"q" in this case.
« Enable bit "EN"
« Done bit "DN"
¢ Timer timing bit "TT"
Preset value needs to be entered by the user.

To reset the counter use "Reset" command so that the counter can be
configured for new counts without reloading the page. Please note the
tag of the reset bit must be the tag of counter e.g."CU1". The screen
shot will appear as shown below.

While configuring the timer the time base needs to be selected. There
are two options viz. 1 mS and 10 mS are available for you to configure.
Select appropriate as per the need of the application. The screen shot
of the configured timer will appear like this.
To test the EN, DN, and TT bits; double click on the bit and give tag
name to the bit. The same tag name is to be used in the new rung to
test the status or to energies the output. You can also test the
cascading of the timer using these bits. For details see following screen
shots. Observe the tag name for timer DN bit in Edit Mode and how it
is used in the logic.

re so ea

| O corns sen tamara 16 JEW. Oe

Observe the bit status in Run mode when inputa is toggled.
[= Beane

© Ocaptsin sn

See following screen shot to observe the output bit status when delay
is over.

To reset the DN counter use "Reset" command so that the counter can
be configured for new counts without reloading the page. Please note
the tag of the reset bit must be the tag of counter e.g. ""CD1".

Observation:

Conclusion:

ON-delay timer circuits are not activated until after a certain amount
of time (preset) has elapsed. They are used to control the timing of
conveyor belts and other equipment.
Experiment 8: Develop an application using OFF Delay Timer

Aim: To Develop an application using OFF Delay Timer

Objectives:

4. Study the timing diagram of OFF Delay Timer
2. Solve the assignment of Toff timer

Procedure:
The configuration of off delay timer is same as 'on delay timer’.

Atypical difference can be observed in the operation (in Run mode).

When the q bit is energised the output DN bit goes high. The timer
starts only after toggling the initialisation bit again.

To test the EN, DN, and TT bits; double click on the bit and give tag
name to the bit. The same tag name is to be used in the new rung to
test the status or to energies the output. You can also test the
cascading of the timer using these bits.

Observation:

' =
2 a
a a

Conclusion:

OFF-delay timers open or close the circuit as soon as power is
removed. The contacts will not return to their normal position until
the preset time delay has elapsed. They are used in air-conditioning
systems, elevator doors, etc.
Experiment 9: Develop an application using UP/DOWN counter

Aim: To Develop an application using UP/DOWN counter

Objectives:

4. Study Counter timing diagram.
2. Develop an application specific ladder program using counters.

Procedure:
Implement the counter using Simulator

The counter counts the pulses received at input. The pulses can be
given by toggling the input bit "q" in this case. The counter will keep
on counting till it reaches the preset value set by the user. Once the
accumulator is equal to preset the DN bit will be energised. After this
instant if next pulse is detected, the accumulator will increment
without changing the status of DN bit.

To reset the counter use "Reset" command so that the counter can be
configured for new counts without reloading the page. Please note the
tag of the reset bit must be the tag of counter e.g., "CU1". The screen
shot will appear as shown below.

z ap gp aT TARE

© ff Oser02000:

In case of down counter, the entire procedure will remain same. Only
the number of counts is to be entered in the accumulator tab. The
preset value is zero. When the input contact closes, the accumulator
will go on decrementing, will reach to zero '0' value and the status of
done bit will change. To reset the DN counter use "Reset" command so
that the counter can be configured for new counts without reloading
the page. Please note the tag of the reset bit must be the tag of counter
eg. "CD1".

Observation:
UP counter
, m4
a

DOWN counter

Froscounte}

Conclusion:

Up counter counts from zero to the maximum number of counts. Down.
counter counts from the maximum value to zero value.
