SENSORS & AUTOMATION LAB WORK

NAME :- Siddharth Vilas Dahibhate
MIS :- 612211018 BATCH :-A
BRANCH :- Metallurgy & Material Sciences

EXPERIMENT NO. 1

Aim :- To understand the working principle of RTD
( Resistance Temperature Detector )

Objective :- 1. Study the static & dynamic characteristics of RTD
2. Study effect of various parameters on RTD performance

Theory :- A Resistance Temperature Detector is an electronic device
used to determine the temperature by measuring the resistance of an
electrical wire. This wire is referred to as a temperature sensor. If we
want to measure temperature with high accuracy, a RTD is an ideal
solution as it has good linear characteristics over a wide range of
temperatures.

Calculations :-
Conclusion :- We have understood the working and structure of RTD
through simulation.

EXPERIMENT NO. 2

Aim :- To characterise the Linear Variable Differential Transformer.

Objective :- 1. Study the relation between core displacement & output
2. Understand the effect of change in supply frequency on
LVDT performance
3. Understand the effect of change in excitation (supply)
voltage on LVDT performance

Theory :- LVDT is Linear Variable Differential Transformer. It is an
electrochemical transducer It converts the rectilinear displacement of

any object to which it is coupled mechanically in electrical signal
proportional to it.

Calculation :-

UAANAMNIALALAIANNUUAASAALAIASANAIALAALANAAIUAAIAANY 2AM AA
A LUAU GL VAT

Conclusion :- We have studied the working and construction of LVDT
and the effect of various factors on its performance through simulation.

EXPERIMENT NO. 3

Aim :- To understand the working principle of Chemical sensors

Objective :- 1. Study the working principle of pH & conductivity sensors
2. Calibrate the pH sensor
3. Study the effect of temperature on pH measurement
4. Study effect of temperature and effect of contamination
on conductivity measurement

Theory :- pH is one of the most common analyses used in the Process
industry. pH is actually a measurement of the activity of hydrogen ions in
the sample. pH measurement runs on a scale from 0-14, with 7.0
considered as neutral. Electrical conductivity is a measure of the ability
of a solution to carry the current.

Calculation :-
PH Vs Output(mV)

pH Vs Output(mV)

PH Vs Output(mV)

Concentration vs Conductivity

ty Siemens

Concentration in Percentage

© Heasurement Graoh

‘Temperature vs Conductivity

Conductivity Siemens

Temperature in Degree Celsius

& Temperature Gragh 1

Conclusion We have studied the working principles of chemical
sensors for measurement of pH value and conductivity through
simulation.
EXPERIMENT NO. 4

Aim :- To measure tank level using capacitance level probe

Objective :- 1. Review various methods of level measurement
2. Understand working of capacitance level transmitter

Theory :- In industry, liquids such as water, chemicals and solvents are
used in various processes. The amount of such liquid stored can be
found by measuring the level of liquid in a container or a vessel. The
level affects not only the quantity delivered but also pressure and rate of
flow in and out of the container. Level sensors detect the level of
substances like liquid, slurries, granular materials and powders. The
substance to be measured can be inside a container or can be in its
natural form. The level measurement can be either continuous or point
values.

Calculation :-

Graph :-
Level vs Capacitance

Level Vs Current

Conclusion :- We have studied the working of capacitance level probe
and various level measurement methods through a simulation.
EXPERIMENT NO. 5

Aim :- To study hardware and software associated with PLC

Objective :- 1. Learn the basics and hardware components of PLC
2. Understand configuration of PLC system
3. Study various building blocks of PLC

Theory :- A Programmable Logic Controller, PLC or a Programmable
controller is an electronic device used for automation of industrial
processes, such as control on machinery on factory assembly lines. A
programmable controller is a digitally operating electronic apparatus
which uses a programmable memory for the internal storage of
instructions for implementing specific functions, such a_ logic,
sequencing, timing, counting and arithmetic to control various machines
or processes through digital or analog input/output devices. Unlike
general purpose computers, the PLC is designed for multiple inputs and
outputs, extended temperature ranges, immunity to electrical noise and
resistance to vibrations and impacts.

EXPERIMENT NO. 6

Aim :- To understand a simple ladder program

Objective :- 1. Develop a ladder using standard procedure
2. Solve the problem using ladder programming

Theory :- Ladder programming is a popular language of programming
the PLCs. Ladder diagram shows the sequence of the logic execution
which is presented diagrammatically. In the ladder diagram, there are
two vertical lines, generally called phase, positive or neutral. Rungs
which show current flow in horizontal direction are the sequence in which
the logic executes. The Analogous to relay ladder has two main symbols
which are contacts and output coil. Generally each rung has inputs
(contacts) on the left hand side and outputs (coil) on the right hand side.
These contacts and coils are called as bits of the relays. Each input and
output are individual bits in I/O files. An instruction in the ladder instructs
PLCs how to respond to the bits in I/O files which are stored in the
memory. Input contacts are the condition area, the conditions must be
fulfilled to change the status of the output coils. Each manufacturer of
PLC systems has their own style of writing the instructions. Different
PLCs have different instruction sets but even some common basic
instructions are shared by all the PLCs. All manufacturers give different
software packages for programming PLCs. Ladder is the most
commonly used programming language. Prior to PLCs, relay logic was
used in industry. Ladders were developed to mimic or imitate relay logic.
Relay Logic / Instructions. A relay is a simple magnetic device which
acts as a control switch. When the switch is on, current will flow through
the coil on the iron piece. This iron core acts as an electromagnet and
due to the magnetic field upper contact gets attracted towards lower one
and circuit gets completed, allowing current to flow from load.
AND Gate

OR Gate

NOT Gate

Conclusion :- We have implemented the logic gates in the ladder
programming using a simulator.

EXPERIMENT NO. 7

Aim :- To develop and application using On-Delay timer

Objective :- 1. Study the timing diagram of On-Delay timer
2. Solve the assignment of Ton timer

Theory :- It is used when an action is to begin a specified time after the
input becomes true. Consider an example wherein a certain step in the
manufacturing process is to begin 30 seconds after a signal is received
from a limit switch. The 30 seconds delay is the ON-delay timer's preset
value. The figure below shows a symbolic representation of the timer.

Result :-

Conclusion :- We have developed an application of TON Timer using
the simulation

EXPERIMENT NO. 8

Aim :- To develop an application using Off-Delay timer

Objective :- 1. Study the timing diagram of Off-Delay timer
2. Solve the assignment of TOFF timer

Theory :- Consider an example where the contents of a storage tank are
to be transferred to further process. When the low level is detected by
the level switch the outlet valve is to be closed. To allow entire contents
to drain out, some time delay is needed as the level switch is installed
slightly above the tank bottom level. This can be achieved by using an
off delay timer. Consider an example that, there is a Low level switch to
a tank, and we have to close the drain valve of the tank after a 5 second
delay when low level is reached. In this case this 5 seconds delay can
be given using an off delay timer as we have to close the drain valve
after delay.

Result :-

Conclusion :- We have developed an application of TOFF timer using
the simulation.

EXPERIMENT NO. 9

Aim :- To develop an application using Up/Down counter

Objective :- 1. Study counter timing diagram
2. Develop an application specific ladder program using
counters

Theory :- Counters are used to count the number of objects or to count
cycles of a typical process. Consider an example of a bottle filling plant,
in that the counter is used to count the number of bottles filled in a
particular batch. In counter instruction the accumulated value will
increase only when it completes the transition from open to close or vice
versa. It doesn't check how long the contact stays closed, it only looks
for the transition. In the Up counter when contact change over takes
place accumulator value increments by one. While in down counter
when changeover takes place, the accumulator value decreases by one.

Result :-

Conclusion :- We have developed an application of Up/Down counter
using simulation.
